Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders
CARL DOERSCH
Carnegie Mellon / UC Berkeley
August 16, 2016, with very minor revisions on January 3, 2021
Abstract
In just three years, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have emerged
as one of the most popular approaches to unsupervised learning of
complicated distributions. VAEs are appealing because they are built
on top of standard function approximators (neural networks), and
can be trained with stochastic gradient descent. VAEs have already
shown promise in generating many kinds of complicated data, in-
cluding handwritten digits [ 1,2], faces [ 1,3,4], house numbers [ 5,6],
CIFAR images [ 6], physical models of scenes [ 4], segmentation [ 7], and
predicting the future from static images [ 8]. This tutorial introduces the
intuitions behind VAEs, explains the mathematics behind them, and
describes some empirical behavior. No prior knowledge of variational
Bayesian methods is assumed.
Keywords: variational autoencoders, unsupervised learning, structured
prediction, neural networks
1 Introduction
“Generative modeling” is a broad area of machine learning which deals with
models of distributions P(X), deﬁned over datapoints Xin some potentially
high-dimensional space X. For instance, images are a popular kind of data
for which we might create generative models. Each “datapoint” (image) has
thousands or millions of dimensions (pixels), and the generative model’s job
is to somehow capture the dependencies between pixels, e.g., that nearby
pixels have similar color, and are organized into objects. Exactly what it
means to “capture” these dependencies depends on exactly what we want
to do with the model. One straightforward kind of generative model simply
allows us to compute P(X)numerically. In the case of images, Xvalues
1arXiv:1606.05908v3  [stat.ML]  3 Jan 2021
which look like real images should get high probability, whereas images
that look like random noise should get low probability. However, models
like this are not necessarily useful: knowing that one image is unlikely does
not help us synthesize one that is likely.
Instead, one often cares about producing more examples that are like
those already in a database, but not exactly the same. We could start with a
database of raw images and synthesize new, unseen images. We might take
in a database of 3D models of something like plants and produce more of
them to ﬁll a forest in a video game. We could take handwritten text and try
to produce more handwritten text. Tools like this might actually be useful
for graphic designers. We can formalize this setup by saying that we get
examples Xdistributed according to some unknown distribution Pgt(X),
and our goal is to learn a model Pwhich we can sample from, such that Pis
as similar as possible to Pgt.
Training this type of model has been a long-standing problem in the ma-
chine learning community, and classically, most approaches have had one of
three serious drawbacks. First, they might require strong assumptions about
the structure in the data. Second, they might make severe approximations,
leading to sub-optimal models. Or third, they might rely on computation-
ally expensive inference procedures like Markov Chain Monte Carlo. More
recently, some works have made tremendous progress in training neural
networks as powerful function approximators through backpropagation [ 9].
These advances have given rise to promising frameworks which can use
backpropagation-based function approximators to build generative models.
One of the most popular such frameworks is the Variational Autoen-
coder [ 1,3], the subject of this tutorial. The assumptions of this model are
weak, and training is fast via backpropagation. VAEs do make an approxi-
mation, but the error introduced by this approximation is arguably small
given high-capacity models. These characteristics have contributed to a
quick rise in their popularity.
This tutorial is intended to be an informal introduction to VAEs, and not
a formal scientiﬁc paper about them. It is aimed at people who might have
uses for generative models, but might not have a strong background in the
variatonal Bayesian methods and “minimum description length” coding
models on which VAEs are based. This tutorial began its life as a presentation
for computer vision reading groups at UC Berkeley and Carnegie Mellon,
and hence has a bias toward a vision audience. Suggestions for improvement
are appreciated.
2
1.1 Preliminaries: Latent Variable Models
When training a generative model, the more complicated the dependencies
between the dimensions, the more difﬁcult the models are to train. Take,
for example, the problem of generating images of handwritten characters.
Say for simplicity that we only care about modeling the digits 0-9. If the left
half of the character contains the left half of a 5, then the right half cannot
contain the left half of a 0, or the character will very clearly not look like any
real digit. Intuitively, it helps if the model ﬁrst decides which character to
generate before it assigns a value to any speciﬁc pixel. This kind of decision
is formally called a latent variable . That is, before our model draws anything,
it ﬁrst randomly samples a digit value zfrom the set [0, ..., 9 ], and then makes
sure all the strokes match that character. zis called ‘latent’ because given
just a character produced by the model, we don’t necessarily know which
settings of the latent variables generated the character. We would need to
infer it using something like computer vision.
Before we can say that our model is representative of our dataset, we
need to make sure that for every datapoint Xin the dataset, there is one (or
many) settings of the latent variables which causes the model to generate
something very similar to X. Formally, say we have a vector of latent
variables zin a high-dimensional space Zwhich we can easily sample
according to some probability density function (PDF) P(z)deﬁned overZ.
Then, say we have a family of deterministic functions f(z;q), parameterized
by a vector qin some space Q, where f:ZQ!X .fis deterministic, but
ifzis random and qis ﬁxed, then f(z;q)is a random variable in the space
X. We wish to optimize qsuch that we can sample zfrom P(z)and, with
high probability, f(z;q)will be like the X’s in our dataset.
To make this notion precise mathematically, we are aiming maximize the
probability of each Xin the training set under the entire generative process,
according to:
P(X) =Z
P(Xjz;q)P(z)dz. (1)
Here, f(z;q)has been replaced by a distribution P(Xjz;q), which allows us
to make the dependence of Xonzexplicit by using the law of total probabil-
ity. The intuition behind this framework—called “maximum likelihood”—
is that if the model is likely to produce training set samples, then it is
also likely to produce similar samples, and unlikely to produce dissimilar
ones. In VAEs, the choice of this output distribution is often Gaussian, i.e.,
P(Xjz;q) =N(Xjf(z;q),s2I). That is, it has mean f(z;q)and covariance
equal to the identity matrix Itimes some scalar s(which is a hyperparam-
eter). This replacement is necessary to formalize the intuition that some z
3
Figure 1: The standard VAE model represented as a graphical model. Note
the conspicuous lack of any structure or even an “encoder” pathway: it is
possible to sample from the model without any input. Here, the rectangle is
“plate notation” meaning that we can sample from zand X N times while
the model parameters qremain ﬁxed.
needs to result in samples that are merely likeX. In general, and particularly
early in training, our model will not produce outputs that are identical to
any particular X. By having a Gaussian distribution, we can use gradient
descent (or any other optimization technique) to increase P(X)by making
f(z;q)approach Xfor some z, i.e., gradually making the training data more
likely under the generative model. This wouldn’t be possible if P(Xjz)was
a Dirac delta function, as it would be if we used X=f(z;q)deterministi-
cally! Note that the output distribution is not required to be Gaussian: for
instance, if Xis binary, then P(Xjz)might be a Bernoulli parameterized by
f(z;q). The important property is simply that P(Xjz)can be computed, and
is continuous in q. From here onward, we will omit qfrom f(z;q)to avoid
clutter.
2 Variational Autoencoders
The mathematical basis of VAEs actually has relatively little to do with
classical autoencoders, e.g. sparse autoencoders [ 10,11] or denoising au-
toencoders [ 12,13]. VAEs approximately maximize Equation 1, according
to the model shown in Figure 1. They are called “autoencoders” only be-
cause the ﬁnal training objective that derives from this setup does have
an encoder and a decoder, and resembles a traditional autoencoder. Unlike
sparse autoencoders, there are generally no tuning parameters analogous to
the sparsity penalties. And unlike sparse and denoising autoencoders, we
4
4
 3
 2
 1
 0 1 2 3 44
3
2
1
01234
1.5
 1.0
 0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.51.5
1.0
0.5
0.00.51.01.5Figure 2: Given a random variable zwith one distribution, we can create
another random variable X=g(z)with a completely different distribution.
Left: samples from a gaussian distribution. Right: those same samples
mapped through the function g(z) =z/10+z/jjzjjto form a ring. This is
the strategy that VAEs use to create arbitrary distributions: the deterministic
function gis learned from data.
can sample directly from P(X)(without performing Markov Chain Monte
Carlo, as in [14]).
To solve Equation 1, there are two problems that VAEs must deal with:
how to deﬁne the latent variables z(i.e., decide what information they
represent), and how to deal with the integral over z. VAEs give a deﬁnite
answer to both.
First, how do we choose the latent variables zsuch that we capture latent
information? Returning to our digits example, the ‘latent’ decisions that the
model needs to make before it begins painting the digit are actually rather
complicated. It needs to choose not just the digit, but the angle that the digit
is drawn, the stroke width, and also abstract stylistic properties. Worse, these
properties may be correlated: a more angled digit may result if one writes
faster, which also might tend to result in a thinner stroke. Ideally, we want
to avoid deciding by hand what information each dimension of zencodes
(although we may want to specify it by hand for some dimensions [ 4]). We
also want to avoid explicitly describing the dependencies—i.e., the latent
structure—between the dimensions of z. VAEs take an unusual approach to
dealing with this problem: they assume that there is no simple interpretation
of the dimensions of z, and instead assert that samples of zcan be drawn
from a simple distribution, i.e., N(0,I), where Iis the identity matrix. How
5
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3: It’s hard to measure the likelihood of images under a model using
only sampling. Given an image X(a), the middle sample (b) is much closer
in Euclidean distance than the one on the right (c). Because pixel distance is
so different from perceptual distance, a sample needs to be extremely close
in pixel distance to a datapoint Xbefore it can be considered evidence that
Xis likely under the model.
is this possible? The key is to notice that any distribution in ddimensions can
be generated by taking a set of dvariables that are normally distributed and
mapping them through a sufﬁciently complicated function1. For example,
say we wanted to construct a 2D random variable whose values lie on a
ring. If zis 2D and normally distributed, g(z) =z/10+z/jjzjjis roughly
ring-shaped, as shown in Figure 2. Hence, provided powerful function
approximators, we can simply learn a function which maps our independent,
normally-distributed zvalues to whatever latent variables might be needed
for the model, and then map those latent variables to X. In fact, recall that
P(Xjz;q) =N(Xjf(z;q),s2I). Iff(z;q)is a multi-layer neural network,
then we can imagine the network using its ﬁrst few layers to map the
normally distributed z’s to the latent values (like digit identity, stroke weight,
angle, etc.) with exactly the right statistics. Then it can use later layers to
map those latent values to a fully-rendered digit. In general, we don’t
need to worry about ensuring that the latent structure exists. If such latent
structure helps the model accurately reproduce (i.e. maximize the likelihood
of) the training set, then the network will learn that structure at some layer.
Now all that remains is to maximize Equation 1, where P(z) =N(zj0,I).
As is common in machine learning, if we can ﬁnd a computable formula
forP(X), and we can take the gradient of that formula, then we can opti-
1In one dimension, you can use the inverse cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the desired distribution composed with the CDF of a Gaussian. This is an extension of
“inverse transform sampling.” For multiple dimensions, do the stated process starting with
the marginal distribution for a single dimension, and repeat with the conditional distribution
of each additional dimension. See the “inversion method” and the “conditional distribution
method” in Devroye et al. [15]
6
mize the model using stochastic gradient ascent. It is actually conceptually
straightforward to compute P(X)approximately: we ﬁrst sample a large
number of zvaluesfz1, ...,zng, and compute P(X)1
nåiP(Xjzi). The prob-
lem here is that in high dimensional spaces, nmight need to be extremely
large before we have an accurate estimate of P(X). To see why, consider
our example of handwritten digits. Say that our digit datapoints are stored
in pixel space, in 28x28 images as shown in Figure 3. Since P(Xjz)is an
isotropic Gaussian, the negative log probability of Xis proportional squared
Euclidean distance between f(z)and X. Say that Figure 3(a) is the target
(X) for which we are trying to ﬁnd P(X). A model which produces the
image shown in Figure 3(b) is probably a bad model, since this digit is not
much like a 2. Hence, we should set the shyperparameter of our Gaussian
distribution such that this kind of erroneous digit does not contribute to
P(X). On the other hand, a model which produces Figure 3(c) (identical to
Xbut shifted down and to the right by half a pixel) might be a good model.
We would hope that this sample would contribute to P(X). Unfortunately,
however, we can’t have it both ways: the squared distance between Xand
Figure 3(c) is .2693 (assuming pixels range between 0 and 1), but between
Xand Figure 3(b) it is just .0387. The lesson here is that in order to reject
samples like Figure 3(b), we need to set svery small, such that the model
needs to generate something signiﬁcantly more like Xthan Figure 3(c)! Even
if our model is an accurate generator of digits, we would likely need to
sample many thousands of digits before we produce a 2 that is sufﬁciently
similar to the one in Figure 3(a). We might solve this problem by using
a better similarity metric, but in practice these are difﬁcult to engineer in
complex domains like vision, and they’re difﬁcult to train without labels
that indicate which datapoints are similar to each other. Instead, VAEs alter
the sampling procedure to make it faster, without changing the similarity
metric.
2.1 Setting up the objective
Is there a shortcut we can take when using sampling to compute Equation 1?
In practice, for most z,P(Xjz)will be nearly zero, and hence contribute
almost nothing to our estimate of P(X). The key idea behind the variational
autoencoder is to attempt to sample values of zthat are likely to have
produced X, and compute P(X)just from those. This means that we need a
new function Q(zjX)which can take a value of Xand give us a distribution
over zvalues that are likely to produce X. Hopefully the space of zvalues
that are likely under Qwill be much smaller than the space of all z’s that are
likely under the prior P(z). This lets us, for example, compute EzQP(Xjz)
relatively easily. However, if zis sampled from an arbitrary distribution
7
with PDF Q(z), which is notN(0,I), then how does that help us optimize
P(X)? The ﬁrst thing we need to do is relate EzQP(Xjz)and P(X). We’ll
see where Qcomes from later.
The relationship between EzQP(Xjz)and P(X)is one of the corner-
stones of variational Bayesian methods. We begin with the deﬁnition of
Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL divergence or D) between P(zjX)and
Q(z), for some arbitrary Q(which may or may not depend on X):
D[Q(z)kP(zjX)]=EzQ[logQ(z) logP(zjX)]. (2)
We can get both P(X)and P(Xjz)into this equation by applying Bayes rule
toP(zjX):
D[Q(z)kP(zjX)]=EzQ[logQ(z) logP(Xjz) logP(z)]+logP(X).
(3)
Here, logP(X)comes out of the expectation because it does not depend on
z. Negating both sides, rearranging, and contracting part of EzQinto a
KL-divergence terms yields:
logP(X) D[Q(z)kP(zjX)]=EzQ[logP(Xjz)] D[Q(z)kP(z)]. (4)
Note that Xis ﬁxed, and Qcan be anydistribution, not just a distribution
which does a good job mapping Xto the z’s that can produce X. Since we’re
interested in inferring P(X), it makes sense to construct a Qwhich does
depend on X, and in particular, one which makes D[Q(z)kP(zjX)]small:
logP(X) D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]=EzQ[logP(Xjz)] D[Q(zjX)kP(z)].
(5)
This equation serves as the core of the variational autoencoder, and it’s
worth spending some time thinking about what it says2. In two sentences,
the left hand side has the quantity we want to maximize: logP(X)(plus
an error term, which makes Qproduce z’s that can reproduce a given X;
this term will become small if Qis high-capacity). The right hand side
is something we can optimize via stochastic gradient descent given the
right choice of Q(although it may not be obvious yet how). Note that the
framework—in particular, the right hand side of Equation 5—has suddenly
taken a form which looks like an autoencoder, since Qis “encoding” Xinto
z, and Pis “decoding” it to reconstruct X. We’ll explore this connection in
more detail later.
2Historically, this math (particularly Equation 5) was known long before VAEs. For
example, Helmholtz Machines [16] (see Equation 5) use nearly identical mathematics, with
one crucial difference. The integral in our expectations is replaced with a sum in Dayan et
al. [16], because Helmholtz Machines assume a discrete distribution for the latent variables.
This choice prevents the transformations that make gradient descent tractable in VAEs.
8
Now for a bit more detail on Equatinon 5. Starting with the left hand side,
we are maximizing logP(X)while simultaneously minimizing D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)].
P(zjX)is not something we can compute analytically: it describes the val-
ues of zthat are likely to give rise to a sample like Xunder our model in
Figure 1. However, the second term on the left is pulling Q(zjx)to match
P(zjX). Assuming we use an arbitrarily high-capacity model for Q(zjx),
then Q(zjx)will hopefully actually match P(zjX), in which case this KL-
divergence term will be zero, and we will be directly optimizing logP(X).
As an added bonus, we have made the intractable P(zjX)tractable: we can
just use Q(zjx)to compute it.
2.2 Optimizing the objective
So how can we perform stochastic gradient descent on the right hand
side of Equation 5? First we need to be a bit more speciﬁc about the
form that Q(zjX)will take. The usual choice is to say that Q(zjX) =
N(zjm(X;J),S(X;J)), where mandSare arbitrary deterministic functions
with parameters Jthat can be learned from data (we will omit Jin later
equations). In practice, mandSare again implemented via neural networks,
andSis constrained to be a diagonal matrix. The advantages of this choice
are computational, as they make it clear how to compute the right hand
side. The last term— D[Q(zjX)kP(z)]—is now a KL-divergence between
two multivariate Gaussian distributions, which can be computed in closed
form as:
D[N(m0,S0)kN(m1,S1)] =
1
2
tr
S 1
1S0
+(m1 m0)>S 1
1(m1 m0) k+log
detS1
detS0
(6)
where kis the dimensionality of the distribution. In our case, this simpliﬁes
to:
D[N(m(X),S(X))kN(0,I)] =
1
2
tr(S(X))+(m(X))>(m(X)) k log det (S(X))
.
(7)
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of Equation 5 is a bit more tricky.
We could use sampling to estimate EzQ[logP(Xjz)], but getting a good
estimate would require passing many samples of zthrough f, which would
be expensive. Hence, as is standard in stochastic gradient descent, we
take one sample of zand treat logP(Xjz)for that zas an approximation
ofEzQ[logP(Xjz)]. After all, we are already doing stochastic gradient
descent over different values of Xsampled from a dataset D. The full
9
Encoder  
(   ) 
Decoder  
(   ) 
Sample    from  
Encoder  
(   ) 
Decoder  
(   ) 
Sample    from  
* + Figure 4: A training-time variational autoencoder implemented as a feed-
forward neural network, where P(Xjz)is Gaussian. Left is without the
“reparameterization trick”, and right is with it. Red shows sampling opera-
tions that are non-differentiable. Blue shows loss layers. The feedforward
behavior of these networks is identical, but backpropagation can be applied
only to the right network.
equation we want to optimize is:
EXD[logP(X) D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]]=
EXD[EzQ[logP(Xjz)] D[Q(zjX)kP(z)]].
(8)
If we take the gradient of this equation, the gradient symbol can be moved
into the expectations. Therefore, we can sample a single value of Xand a
single value of zfrom the distribution Q(zjX), and compute the gradient of:
logP(Xjz) D[Q(zjX)kP(z)]. (9)
We can then average the gradient of this function over arbitrarily many
samples of Xand z, and the result converges to the gradient of Equation 8.
There is, however, a signiﬁcant problem with Equation 9. EzQ[logP(Xjz)]
depends not just on the parameters of P, but also on the parameters of Q.
However, in Equation 9, this dependency has disappeared! In order to make
VAEs work, it’s essential to drive Qto produce codes for Xthat Pcan reliably
decode. To see the problem a different way, the network described in Equa-
tion 9 is much like the network shown in Figure 4 (left). The forward pass of
this network works ﬁne and, if the output is averaged over many samples
ofXand z, produces the correct expected value. However, we need to
10
Decoder  
(   ) 
Sample    from  
Figure 5: The testing-time variational “autoencoder,” which allows us to
generate new samples. The “encoder” pathway is simply discarded.
back-propagate the error through a layer that samples zfrom Q(zjX), which
is a non-continuous operation and has no gradient. Stochastic gradient
descent via backpropagation can handle stochastic inputs, but not stochastic
units within the network! The solution, called the “reparameterization trick”
in [1], is to move the sampling to an input layer. Given m(X)andS(X)—the
mean and covariance of Q(zjX)—we can sample from N(m(X),S(X))by
ﬁrst sampling eN(0,I), then computing z=m(X) +S1/2(X)e. Thus,
the equation we actually take the gradient of is:
EXDh
EeN(0,I)[logP(Xjz=m(X) +S1/2(X)e)] D[Q(zjX)kP(z)]i
.
(10)
This is shown schematically in Figure 4 (right). Note that none of the
expectations are with respect to distributions that depend on our model
parameters, so we can safely move a gradient symbol into them while main-
taning equality. That is, given a ﬁxed Xande, this function is deterministic
and continuous in the parameters of Pand Q, meaning backpropagation
can compute a gradient that will work for stochastic gradient descent. It’s
worth pointing out that the “reparameterization trick” only works if we can
sample from Q(zjX)by evaluating a function h(h,X), where his noise from
a distribution that is not learned. Furthermore, hmust be continuous inXso
that we can backprop through it. This means Q(zjX)(and therefore P(z))
can’t be a discrete distribution! If Qis discrete, then for a ﬁxed h, either h
needs to ignore X, or there needs to be some point at which h(h,X)“jumps”
from one possible value in Q’s sample space to another, i.e., a discontinuity.
2.3 Testing the learned model
At test time, when we want to generate new samples, we simply input
values of zN(0,I)into the decoder. That is, we remove the “encoder,”
including the multiplication and addition operations that would change the
11
distribution of z. This (remarkably simple) test-time network is shown in
Figure 5.
Say that we want to evaluate the probability of a testing example un-
der the model. This is, in general, not tractable. Note, however, that
D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]is positive, meaning that the right hand side of Equa-
tion 5 is a lower bound to P(X). This lower bound still can’t quite be
computed in closed form due to the expectation over z, which requires sam-
pling. However, sampling zfrom Qgives an estimator for the expectation
which generally converges much faster than sampling zfromN(0,I)as dis-
cussed in section 2. Hence, this lower bound can be a useful tool for getting
a rough idea of how well our model is capturing a particular datapoint X.
2.4 Interpreting the objective
By now, you are hopefully convinced that the learning in VAEs is tractable,
and that it optimizes something like logP(X)across our entire dataset. How-
ever, we are not optimizing exactly logP(X), so this section aims to take a
deeper look at what the objective function is actually doing. We address
three topics. First, we ask how much error is introduced by optimizing
D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]in addition to logP(X). Second, we describe the VAE
framework—especially the r.h.s. of Equation 5—in terms of information the-
ory, linking it to other approaches based on Minimum Description Length.
Finally, we investigate whether VAEs have “regularization parameters” anal-
ogous to the sparsity penalty in sparse autoencoders.
2.4.1 The error from D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]
The tractability of this model relies on our assumption that Q(zjX)can be
modeled as a Gaussian with some mean m(X)and variance S(X).P(X)con-
verges (in distribution) to the true distribution if and only if D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]
goes to zero. Unfortunately, it’s not straightforward to ensure that this hap-
pens. Even if we assume m(X)andS(X)are arbitrarily high capacity, the
posterior P(zjX)is not necessarily Gaussian for an arbitrary ffunction that
we’re using to deﬁne P. For ﬁxed P, this might mean that D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]
never goes to zero. However, the good news is that given sufﬁciently high-
capacity neural networks, there are many ffunctions that result in our
model generating any given output distribution. Any of these functions will
maximize logP(X)equally well. Hence, all we need is one function fwhich
both maximizes logP(X)andresults in P(zjX)being Gaussian for all X. If
so,D[Q(zjX)kP(zjX)]will pull our model towards that parameterization of
the distribution. So, does such a function exist for all distributions we might
want to approximate? I’m not aware of anyone proving this in general just
12
yet, but it turns out that one can prove that such a function does exist, pro-
vided sis small relative to the curvature of the ground truth distribution’s
CDF (at least in 1D; a proof is included in Appendix A). In practice such
a small smight cause problems for existing machine learning algorithms,
since the gradients would become badly scaled. However, it is comforting to
know that VAEs have zero approximation error in at least this one scenario.
This fact suggests that future theoretical work may show us how much
approximation error VAEs have in more practical setups. (It seems to me
like it should be possible to extend the proof technique in Appendix A to
multiple dimensions, but this is left for future work.)
2.4.2 The information-theoretic interpretation
Another important way to look at the right hand side of Equation 5 is
in terms of information theory, and in particular, the “minimum descrip-
tion length” principle which motivated many of the VAE’s predecessors
like Helmholtz Machines [ 16], the Wake-Sleep Algorithm [ 17], Deep Belief
Nets [ 18], and Boltzmann Machines [ 19]. logP(X)can be seen as the total
number of bits required to construct a given Xunder our model using an
ideal encoding. The right hand side of Equation 5 views this as a two-step
process to construct X. We ﬁrst use some bits to construct z. Recall that
a KL-divergence is in units of bits (or, more precisely, nats). Speciﬁcally,
D[Q(zjX)jjP(z)]is the expected information that’s required to convert an
uninformative sample from P(z)into a sample from Q(zjX)(the so-called
“information gain” interpretation of KL-divergence). That is, it measures
the amount of extra information that we get about Xwhen zcomes from
Q(zjX)instead of from P(z)(for more details, see the “bits back” argument
of [20,21]). In the second step, P(Xjz)measures the amount of information
required to reconstruct Xfrom zunder an ideal encoding. Hence, the total
number of bits ( logP(X)) is the sum of these two steps, minus a penalty
we pay for Qbeing a sub-optimal encoding ( D[Q(zjX)jjP(zjX)]).
2.4.3 VAEs and the regularization parameter
Looking at Equation 5, it’s interesting to view the D[Q(zjX)jjP(z)]as a
regularization term, much like the sparsity regularization in sparse au-
toencoders [ 10]. From this standpoint, it’s interesting to ask whether the
variational autoencoder has any “regularization parameter.” That is, in the
sparse autoencoder objective, we have a lregularization parameter in an
objective function that looks something like this:
kf(y(X)) Xk2+lky(X)k0 (11)
13
where yandfare the encoder and decoder functions, respectively, and
kk 0is an L0norm that encourages the encoding to be sparse. This lmust
be set by hand.
A variational autoencoder, however, does not, in general, have such a
regularization parameter, which is good because that’s one less parameter
that the programmer needs to adjust. However, for certain models, we can
make it appear like such a regularization parameter exists. It’s tempting to
think that this parameter can come from changing zN(0,I)to something
likez0N(0,lI), but it turns out that this doesn’t change the model. To
see this, note that we can absorb this constant into Pand Qby writing them
in terms of f0(z0) = f(z0/l),m0(X) =m(X)l, and S0(X) =S(X)l2.
This will produce an objective function whose value (right hand side of
Equation 5) is identical to the loss we had with zN(0,I). Also, the model
for sampling Xwill be identical, since z0/lN(0,I).
However, there is another place where a regularization parameter can
come from. Recall that a good choice for the output distribution for con-
tinuous data is P(Xjz)N(f(z),s2I)for some swe supply. Therefore,
logP(Xjz) = C 1
2kX f(z)k2/s2(where Cis a constant that does not
depend on f, and can be ignored during optimization). When we write the
full optimization objective, sappears in the second term on the r.h.s. of
Equation 5, but not the ﬁrst; in this sense, the swe choose behaves like a l
controlling the weighting of the two terms. Note, however, that the existence
of this parameter relies on our choice of the distribution of Xgiven z. If
Xis binary and we use a Bernoulli output model, then this regularization
parameter disappears, and the only way to bring it back is to use hacks like
replicating the dimensions of X. From an information theory standpoint,
this makes sense: when Xis binary, we can actually count the number of
bits that are required to encode X, and both terms on the right hand side of
Equation 5 are using the same units to count these bits. However, when X
is continuous, each sample contains inﬁnite information. Our choice of s
determines how accurately we expect the model to reconstruct X, which is
necessary so that the information content can become ﬁnite.
3 Conditional Variational Autoencoders
Let’s return to our running example of generating handwritten digits. Say
that we don’t just want to generate new digits, but instead we want to add
digits to an existing string of digits written by a single person. This is similar
to a truly practical problem in computer graphics called hole ﬁlling: given
an existing image where a user has removed an unwanted object, the goal
is to ﬁll in the hole with plausible-looking pixels. An important difﬁculty
14
Encoder  
(   ) 
Decoder  
(   ) 
Sample    from  
* + 
Decoder  
(   ) 
Sample    from  
Figure 6: Left: a training-time conditional variational autoencoder imple-
mented as a feedforward neural network, following the same notation as
Figure 4. Right: the same model at test time, when we want to sample from
P(YjX).
with both problems is that the space of plausible outputs is multi-modal :
there are many possibilities for the next digit or the extrapolated pixels. A
standard regression model will fail in this situation, because the training
objective generally penalizes the distance between a single prediction and
the ground truth. Faced with a problem like this, the best solution the
regressor can produce is something which is in between the possibilities,
since it minimizes the expected distance. In the case of digits, this will most
likely look like a meaningless blur that’s an “average image” of all possible
digits and all possible styles that could occur3. What we need is an algorithm
that takes in a string or an image, and produces a complex, multimodal
distribution that we can sample from. Enter the conditional variational
autoencoder (CVAE) [ 7,8], which modiﬁes the math in the previous section
by simply conditioning the entire generative process on an input. CVAEs
allow us to tackle problems where the input-to-output mapping is one-to-
many4, without requiring us to explicitly specify the structure of the output
3The denoising autoencoder [ 12,13] can be seen as a slight generalization of the regres-
sion model, which might improve on its behavior. That is, we would say that the “noise
distribution” simply deletes pixels, and so the denoising autoencoder must reconstruct
the original image given the noisy version. Note, however, that this still doesn’t solve the
problem. The standard denoising autoencoder still requires that the conditional distribution
of the original sample given the noisy sample follow a simple, parametric distribution. This
is not the case for complex data like image patches.
4Often called “structured prediction” in machine learning literature.
15
distribution.
Given an input Xand an output Y, we want to create a model P(YjX)
which maximizes the probability of the ground truth (I apologize for re-
deﬁning Xhere. However, standard machine learning notation maps X
toY, so I will too). We deﬁne the model by introducing a latent variable
zN(0,I), such that:
P(YjX) =N(f(z,X),s2I) (12)
where fis a deterministic function that we can learn from data. We can
rewrite Equations 2 through 5 conditioning on Xas follows:
D[Q(zjY,X)kP(zjY,X)]=EzQ(jY,X)[logQ(zjY,X) logP(zjY,X)]
(13)
D[Q(zjY,X)kP(zjY,X)]=
EzQ(jY,X)[logQ(zjY,X) logP(Yjz,X) logP(zjX)]+logP(YjX)
(14)
logP(YjX) D[Q(zjY,X)kP(zjY,X)]=
EzQ(jY,X)[logP(Yjz,X)] D[Q(zjY,X)kP(zjX)]
(15)
Note that P(zjX)is stillN(0,I)because our model assumes zis sampled
independently of Xat test time. The structure of this model is shown in
Figure 6.
At test time, we can sample from the distribution P(YjX)by simply
sampling zN(0,I).
4 Examples
Implementations for these examples using Caffe [ 22] can be found online at:
http://github.com/cdoersch/vae_tutorial
4.1 MNIST variational autoencoder
To demonstrate the distribution learning capabilities of the VAE framework,
let’s train a variational autoencoder on MNIST. To show that the framework
isn’t heavily dependent on initialization or network structure, we don’t
use existing published VAE network structures, but instead adapt the basic
MNIST AutoEncoder example that’s included with Caffe [ 22]. (However,
we use ReLU non-linearities [ 9] and ADAM [ 23], since both are standard
techniques to speed convergence.) Although MNIST is real-valued, it is
16
Figure 7: Samples from a VAE trained on MNIST.
constrained between 0 and 1, so we use the Sigmoid Cross Entropy loss
forP(Xjz). This has a probabilistic interpretation: imagine that we cre-
ated a new datapoint X0by independently sampling each dimension as
X0
iBernoulli (Xi). Cross entropy measures the expected probability of X0.
Thus we’re actually modeling X0, the randomly binarized version of MNIST,
but we’re only giving qa summary of this data X. Admittedly this is not
quite what the VAE framework prescribes but works well in practice, and
is used in other VAE literature [ 6]. Even though our model is considerably
deeper than [ 1] and [ 3], training the model was not difﬁcult. The training
was run to completion exactly once (though the training was re-started the
5 times to ﬁnd the learning rate which made the loss descend the fastest).
Digits generated from noise are shown in Figure 7. It’s worth noting that
these samples are difﬁcult to evaluate since there’s no simple way to mea-
sure how different these are from the training set [ 24]. However, the failure
cases are interesting: while most of the digits look quite realistic, a signif-
icant number are ‘in-between’ different digits. For example, the seventh
digit from the top in the leftmost column is clearly in-between a 7 and a 9.
This happens because we are mapping a continuous distribution through a
smooth function.
In practice, the model seems to be quite insensitive to the dimensionality
ofz, unless zis excessively large or small. Too few z’s means the model can
17
(a) CVAE
(b) Regressor
(c) Ground Truth
Figure 8: Samples from a CVAE trained on MNIST. The input that the model
is conditioning on is the central column, highlighted in blue and orange in
the top two images. The model must complete the digit given only these
noisy binary values. The three sets above are aligned spatially, so you can
compare the generated images to the ground truth.
no longer capture all of the variation: less than 4 zdimensions produced
noticeably worse results. Results with 1,000 z’s were good, but with 10,000
they were also degraded. In theory, if a model with n z’s is good, then a
model with m>> nshould not be worse, since the model can simply learn
to ignore the extra dimensions. However, in practice, it seems stochastic
gradient descent struggles to keep D[Q(zjX)jjP(z)]low when zis extremely
large.
18
5 MNIST conditional variational autoencoder
I had originally intended to show a conditional variational autoencoder
completing MNIST digits given only half of each digit. While a CVAE works
quite well for this purpose, unfortunately a regressor actually works quite
well also, producing relatively crisp samples. The apparent reason is the size
of MNIST. A network with similar capacity to the one in section 4.1 can easily
memorize the entire dataset, and so the regressor overﬁts badly. Thus, at test
time, it produces predictions that behave something like nearest-neighbor
matching, which are actually quite sharp. CVAE models are most likely
to outperform simple regression when the output is ambiguous given a
training example. Therefore, let’s make two modiﬁcations to the problem to
make it more ambiguous, at the cost of making it somewhat more artiﬁcial.
First, the input is a single column of pixels taken from the middle of the digit.
In MNIST, each pixel has a value between 0 and 1, meaning that there is still
enough information even in this single column of pixels for the network to
identify a speciﬁc training example. Therefore, the second modiﬁcation is to
replace each pixel in our column with a binary value (0 or 1), choosing 1 with
probability equal to the pixel intensity. These binary values were resampled
each time a digit was passed to the network. Figure 8 shows the results.
Note that the regressor model handles the ambiguity by blurring its output
(although there are cases where the regressor is suspiciously conﬁdent when
making wrong guesses, suggesting overﬁtting is still an issue). The blur in
the regressor’s output minimizes the distance to the set of many digits which
might have produced the input. The CVAE, on the other hand, generally
picks a speciﬁc digit to output and does so without blur, resulting in more
believable images.
Acknowledgements: Thanks to everyone in the UCB CS294 Visual Ob-
ject And Activity Recognition group and CMU Misc-Read group, and to
many others who encouraged me to convert the presentation I gave there
into a tutorial. I would especially like to thank Philipp Krähenbühl, Jacob
Walker, and Deepak Pathak for helping me formulate and reﬁne my de-
scription of the method, and Kenny Marino for help editing. I also thank
Abhinav Gupta and Alexei Efros for helpful discussions and support, and
Google for their fellowship supporting my research.
A Proof in 1D that VAEs have zero approximation er-
ror given arbitrarily powerful learners.
LetPgt(X)be a 1D distribution that we are trying to approximate using
a VAE. We assume that Pgt(X)>0everywhere, that it is inﬁnitely dif-
19
ferentiable, and all the derivatives are bounded. Recall that a variational
autoencoder optimizes
logPs(X) D[Qs(zjX)kPs(zjX)] (16)
where Ps(Xjz) =N(Xjf(z),s2)forzN(0, 1),Ps(X) =R
zPs(Xjz)P(z)dz,
and Qs(zjX) =N(zjms(X),Ss(X)). We make the dependence on sexplicit
here since we will send it to 0 to prove convergence. The theoretical best pos-
sible solution is where Ps=PgtandD[Qs(zjX)kPs(zjX)] = 0. By “arbitrar-
ily powerful” learners, we mean that if there exist f,mandSwhich achieve
this best possible solution, then the learning algorithm will ﬁnd them. Hence,
we must merely show that such an f,ms, and Ssexist. First off, Pgtcan
actually be described arbitrarily well as Pgt(X) =R
zN(Xjf(z),s2)P(z)dzas
sapproaches 0. To show this, let Fbe the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of Pgt, and let Gbe the CDF ofN(0, 1), which are both guaranteed
to exist. Then G(z)is distributed Uni f (0, 1)(the uniform distribution), and
therefore f(z) =F 1(G(z))is distributed Pgt(X). This means that as s!0,
the distribution P(X)converges to Pgt.
From here, we must simply show that D[Qs(zjX)kPs(zjX)]!0as
s!0. Let g(X) = G 1(F(X)), i.e., the inverse of f, and let Qs(zjX) =
N(zjg(X),(g0(X)s)2). Note thatD[Qs(zjX)jjPs(zjX)]is invariant to
afﬁne transformations of the sample space. Hence, let Q0(z0jX) =N(z0jg(X),g0(X)2)
and P0
s(z0jX) = Ps(z=g(X) + ( z0 g(X))sjX)s. When I write
P(z=...), I am using the PDF of zas a function, and evaluating it at
some point. Then:
D[Qs(zjX)kPs(zjX)] =D[Q0(z0jX)kP0
s(z0jX)] (17)
where Q0(z0jX)does not depend on s, and its standard deviation is greater
than 0. Therefore, it is sufﬁcient to show that P0
s(z0jX)!Q0(z0jX)for all z.
Letr=g(X) + ( z0 g(X))s. Then:
P0
s(z0jX) = Ps(z=rjX=X)s
=Ps(X=Xjz=r)P(z=r)s
Ps(X=X).(18)
Here, Ps(X)!Pgt(X)ass!0, which is a constant, and r!g(X)as
s!0, soP(r)also tends to a constant. Together with s, they ensure that
the whole distribution normalizes. We will wrap them both in the constant
C.
=CN(Xjf(g(X) + ( z0 g(X))s),s2). (19)
20
Next, we do a Taylor expansion of faround g(X):
=CN 
XX+f0(g(X))(z0 g(X))s+¥
å
n=2f(n)(g(X))((z0 g(X))s)n
n!,s2!
.
(20)
Note thatN(Xjm,s) = (p
2ps) 1exp (x m)2
2s2
. We rewrite the above
using this formula, rearrange terms, and re-write the result as a Gaussian to
obtain:
=Cf0(g(X))
sN 
z0g(X) ¥
å
n=2f(n)(g(X))((z0 g(X))s)n
n!f0(g(X))s,1
f0(g(X))2!
.
(21)
Note 1/f0(g(X)) = g0(X), since f=g 1. Furthermore, since f(n)is
bounded for all n, all terms in the sum tend to 0 as s!0.Cmust make the
distribution normalize, so we have that the above expression:
!N 
z0jg(X),g0(X)2=Q0(z0jX) (22)
Looking at Equation 21, the bulk of the approximation error in this setup
comes from the curvature of g, which is mostly determined by the curvature
of the c.d.f. of the ground truth distribution.
References
1.Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes.
ICLR , 2014.
2.Tim Salimans, Diederik Kingma, and Max Welling. Markov chain monte
carlo and variational inference: Bridging the gap. ICML , 2015.
3.Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochas-
tic backpropagation and approximate inference in deep generative mod-
els. In ICML , 2014.
4.Tejas D Kulkarni, William F. Whitney, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenen-
baum. Deep convolutional inverse graphics network. In NIPS , 2015.
5.Diederik P Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and
Max Welling. Semi-supervised learning with deep generative models.
InNIPS , 2014.
6.Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Rezende, and Daan
Wierstra. Draw: A recurrent neural network for image generation. In
ICCV , 2015.
21
7.Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured
output representation using deep conditional generative models. In
NIPS , 2015.
8.Jacob Walker, Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert. An
uncertain future: Forecasting from static images using variational au-
toencoders. In ECCV , 2016.
9.Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoff Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁca-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In NIPS , 2012.
10.Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Emergence of simple-cell recep-
tive ﬁeld properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature ,
381(6583):607–609, 1996.
11.Honglak Lee, Alexis Battle, Rajat Raina, and Andrew Y Ng. Efﬁcient
sparse coding algorithms. In NIPS , 2006.
12.Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine
Manzagol. Extracting and composing robust features with denoising
autoencoders. In ICML , 2008.
13.Yoshua Bengio, Eric Thibodeau-Laufer, Guillaume Alain, and Jason
Yosinski. Deep generative stochastic networks trainable by backprop.
ICML , 2014.
14.Yoshua Bengio, Li Yao, Guillaume Alain, and Pascal Vincent. Gener-
alized denoising auto-encoders as generative models. In NIPS , pages
899–907, 2013.
15.Luc Devroye. Sample-based non-uniform random variate generation .
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1986.
16.Peter Dayan, Geoffrey E Hinton, Radford M Neal, and Richard S Zemel.
The helmholtz machine. Neural computation , 7(5):889–904, 1995.
17.Geoffrey E Hinton, Peter Dayan, Brendan J Frey, and Radford M Neal.
The" wake-sleep" algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science ,
268(5214):1158–1161, 1995.
18.Geoffrey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh. A fast learning
algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural computation , 18(7):1527–1554, 2006.
19.Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Geoffrey E Hinton. Deep boltzmann ma-
chines. In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics ,
pages 448–455, 2009.
20.Geoffrey E Hinton and Drew Van Camp. Keeping the neural networks
simple by minimizing the description length of the weights. In Pro-
ceedings of the sixth annual conference on Computational learning theory ,
1993.
22
21.Geoffrey E Hinton and Richard S Zemel. Autoencoders, minimum
description length, and helmholtz free energy. In NIPS , 1994.
22.Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan
Long, Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. Caffe:
Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding. In ACM-MM ,
2014.
23.Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization. ICLR , 2015.
24.Lucas Theis, Aäron van den Oord, and Matthias Bethge. A note on the
evaluation of generative models. ICLR , 2016.
23
